On April 25 and 26, 1986, the worst nuclear accident in history occurred in what is now northern Ukraine, when a reactor at a nuclear power plant in Chernobyl exploded and set the plant on fire. The incident, shrouded in secrecy, was a defining moment in both the Cold War and the history of nuclear energy. Today, almost thirty-six years later, scientists estimate that the area surrounding the old plant will not be habitable for 20,000 years.

The disaster took place near the city of Chernobyl in the former USSR, which invested heavily in nuclear energy after World War II. Starting in 1977, Soviet scientists installed four RBMK nuclear reactors at the nuclear power plant, which is located south of the current border between Ukraine and Belarus.

On April 25, 1986, the fourth reactor at the Vladimir Ilyich Lenin Nuclear Power Plant was scheduled for routine maintenance, and workers planned to use the downtime to test whether the reactor could be cooled if the plant lost power.

However, during the test the workers failed to comply with safety protocols and the central power of the plant suddenly increased. Despite attempts to shut down the reactor, another power surge caused a chain reaction of explosions inside it. Eventually, the reactor core was exposed and ejected radioactive material into the atmosphere.

Firefighters attempted to put out a series of fires at the plant, and helicopters ultimately dropped sand and other materials in an attempt to douse the flames and contain the pollution. Despite the death of two people in the explosions, the hospitalization of workers and firefighters, and the danger of radioactive fallout and fire, no one was evacuated from the surrounding areas—not even the nearby city of Pripyat, built in the 1970s to house the plant's workers—up to 36 hours after the disaster began.

Although there were later mass evacuations after the radioactive disaster, people never completely left Chernobyl, according to a recent National Geographic article about life 35 years after the disaster. "As tens of thousands of people were evacuated from homes to which they would never return, tens of thousands flocked to the area," explains journalist Jennifer Kingsley in the article. "Most were under orders to work on decontamination, others came for science, while others defied orders and returned to their villages as soon as they had the chance."

Disclosure of the nuclear accident was considered a significant political risk, but by then, it was too late. The collapse had already spread radiation to Sweden, where authorities at another nuclear power plant began to wonder what was happening in the USSR. After denying the accident at first, the Soviets ended up announcing it on April 28.